Abstract—Digital security is important at NTNU and other uni-
versities to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability
of the university’s digital resources, prevent unauthorised access
or modification of sensitive information, and mitigate potential
cyber threats and attacks. Therefore, the digital security habits
of its students is critical for the university. This paper explores
these habits.
The study was conducted using the survey research method.
Data from 63 respondents at NTNU was collected. These re-
sponses were analysed quantitatively with descriptive statistics.
The results show that 34.9% of the students asked admitted to be
using the same password as their NTNU account on multiple sites,
and 30.2% admitted to be using a version of the same password.
The results emphasise the need for increased awareness and
knowledge regarding password security and the implementation
of additional security measures.
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid increase in digitalization has led to the pro-
liferation of online platforms and services, which, in turn,
has heightened the need for robust security measures. Or-
ganisations, both public and private, are at risk of losing
sensitive data, intellectual property, and reputation, among
other things, if they fail to adequately protect themselves
from cyber threats. This paper aims to assess the online
habits of students at the Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU) when utilising the university’s systems,
including NTNU’s email service, network (Eduroam), and
internal online platform (Blackboard). More specifically, the
paper tries to identify specific habits and practices of students
that could potentially compromise the digital security of the
university.
Through surveys and data analysis, the study seeks to an-
swer the papers research question: ”What are NTNU students
habits with regards to cyber security when using NTNU´s
systems, and should this be improved?”
Our contribution will give further understanding on the
knowledge gap addressed in background; which security
mechanisms do NTNU students´ use, while using NTNU´s
systems.
In this paper the term ”online platform” is defined as a
digital service or website that facilitates the exchange of
information.
II. BACKGROUND
There are already studies done on the topic of online
security on regards to students and security, and security in
online learning. In the paper ”Security Risks and Protection
in Online Learning: A Survey” the researchers focuses on
security risks in online learning [5]. The paper mentions
different security risks and various measuremefnts to protect
against them. The paper concludes that security in online
learning should be taken seriously, before it is too late, and
indicates that online learning providers and practitioners have
not considered security as a top priority. This paper looks
at how these findings correlate to practitioners or students at
NTNU.
Recent advancements in technology and the widespread use
of online platforms have changed the way people interact and
share information. Consequently, it is essential to reassess the
online habits of students and adapt security measures to fit
the current digital landscape. By focusing on NTNU students
and their habits while using the university’s network and
the university´s VPN, this paper aims to provide an updated
perspective on students security habits.
The paper ”Students Information Security Practices and
Awareness” also shares a strong connection with the research
conducted in this paper [6]. The study focus on information
security awareness and practices, through a survey research
method, and find that even though security knowledge and
awareness is relatively high, the compliance is low and stu-
dents do not practice through habits and behaviour what they
know about secure digital habits. These results are based on
limited groups available and does not correlate with another
study found, ”The Level of Information Security Awareness
of First-Year University Students” [8], which indicates that
students in Slovenia, Croatia, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Hungary
have both low knowledge and awareness, as well as bad
security practices and behaviour. Another study by Jones and
Heinrichs from 2012 [10] finds that when using application
software, many students do not avoid harmful habits such as
clicking on web links from unknown sources, downloading
apps when they are not sure if they can trust the website,
using their phone for (unencrypted) financial transactions, and
so on.
It is relevant to mention that the first two and the last of the
studies mentioned were conducted over a decade ago, during a
period in which the use of the internet and information systems
has evolved significantly. In this paper, the aim is to explore
similar aspects as the aforementioned studies, but the focus is
on the habits of students at NTNU when using the university’s
network or VPN. When connected to the universities private
network, students may potentially be a security hazard not only
for themselves, but also NTNU´s whole data network and all
of the systems connected through it. This paper will therefore
aim to assess NTNU students’ adherence to secure digital
habits in the present context as there is a lack of research
on this, and the similar studies are quite old, which we find
to be a knowledge gap.
III. METHODS
A. Choice of method
Following the framework of Oates [2], the chosen strategy
is a survey, and the data generation method is a questionnaire
created in ”https://nettskjema.no/”. The data gathered will be
quantitative and this will therefore be the method for analysis
by descriptive statistics shown through percentages.
The survey research method was chosen for this study as it
provides an efficient and cost-effective way to gather data on
the cyber security habits and practices of a large number of
students. This method aligns well with the research objectives
and questions, which aim to identify patterns and trends in
student habits related to digital security. Surveys allow for the
collection of quantitative data that can be easily analyzed to
identify these patterns and trends.
Moreover, questionnaires, as a data generation method,
enable the researcher to reach a large sample size in a time-
efficient manner (see III-B Sampling), and they have the ad-
vantage of being relatively easy to administer, especially in an
online format. This method also minimizes the possibility of
interviewer bias and provides respondents with a certain level
of anonymity, which might encourage more honest responses.
Alternative research methods that were not chosen for this
study include open-ended questions, where the respondents
are allowed to express their thoughts and feelings in their
own words, providing richer and more nuanced data. Inter-
views that enable researchers to gather detailed information
from participants, ask follow-up questions, and clarify any
ambiguities, or for example observation, where researchers
directly observe participants in the environment in question.
In contrast, multiple choice has the advantage of accumulating
more statistic-friendly data, as opposed to the multi-varied
outcomes produced by these other methods.
B. Sampling
In order to gather data representative of the target group
of NTNU students, it was necessary to calculate the sample
size. ”The Cochran Formula for population size” can be used
to calculate sample sizes where the population size is known.
This was fitting for this research as the number of students at
NTNU in Trondheim, 37000 [4], is known.
The formula is shown in figure 1 where the n represents
the population size and should be 37000. The p represents
the percentage of people who has the trait under the study,
and the q represents the percentage who does not have the
trait under the study. As this information is not known, p and
q will be calculated as 0.5, their maximum value. The z is
standard normal probability which is 1.96, and the d, which
value affects the accuracy of the sampling, is calculated as
0.05 its highest value, for maximum accuracy. This leads to a
suggested sample size of 381.
Fig. 1. The Cochran Formula
The ideal sampling method for this research would be ran-
dom sampling as it would allow for an equal representation of
all NTNU students across faculties and year. However, due to
limitations in this research, a combination of random sampling
and convenience sampling was used. To conduct convenience
sampling, the internal communication platform of the student
association was used, along with private communication. The
random sampling was conducted by posting the survey to a
bulletin board on Innsida, an internal NTNU forum.
C. Questionnaire
The
 questionnaire,
 distributed
 through
”https://nettskjema.no/”, consists of multiple-choice questions
covering the topics of password management, habits when
using Erduroam and NTNU VPN and general security related
habits. The questions are aimed to map student habits to find
common quantitative characteristics, and further be able to
answer the research question. All the questions can be viewed
below:
1) Are you a student at NTNU Trondheim?
2) At which faculty are you a student?
3) Which operating system do you use for school work?
4) Which of these activities have you done while connected
to Erduroam or NTNU VPN?
5) Do you use your NTNU account password on other
accounts?
6) Have you used your NTNU e-mail to create an account
outside of NTNU´s systems?
7) If yes, which?
8) Which security measures do you have/use?
The questions were multiple-choice, except question 7
which allowed for free-text. Question 1, 5 and 6 simply had
the options of yes or no, but question 5 included an options of
”different variants”. Question 2 listed all NTNU faculties as
possible answers. Question 3 listed Linux, Windows, MacOS,
or ”other” as possible answers. Question 4 listed activiteis
such as streaming illegally or legally, downloading software
legally or illegally, browsing the web, and if these activities
had been done in the context of school. Question 6 aimed
to disclose the security measures being used, and the options
were firewall, password manager, secure password generators,
always updating OS, checking links before clicking them,
checking the sender of emails, locking the computer before
leaving it, and closing the computer before leaving it.
IV. RESULTS
The results are based on the answers of 63 students where
50 belong to the IE-faculty (Q2). The 13 others are distributed
on the other faculties, see figure 2. The majority being from the
IE-faculty is most likely due to the sampling method allowing
for convenience sampling, as the writers of this report belong
to this faculty. Of these students, 11 are Linux users, 34 uses
Windows, and 35 uses macOS as their operating system for
school work(Q3).
Fig. 2. Graph showing the distribution of test subjects on the faculties.
Question 4 asked what students has done while connected
to the school WiFi or VPN, and not suprisingly, many has
downloaded software necessary for classes, streamed lectures,
and surfed the web. 42.9% had also downloaded sofware
outside of school work, 74.6% had streamed entertainment,
and a small percent of 3.2% had downloaded illegal content,
and 11.1% had streamed illegal content. See figure 3. This
suggests that students mostly do school related activites when
using Erduroam or the NTNU VPN, but that some students
also use it for their personal activities.
On password security (Q5) 34.9% admitted to be using
the same password as their NTNU account on multiple sites,
and 30.2% admitted to be using a version of the same
password. See figure 4. This puts the accounts at a higher
risk of being breached. However, only 23.8% had used their
NTNU email for non-NTNU related accounts (Q6), meaning
a breached password might not be connected to the NTNU
email, but another personal email. These types of accounts
varied between games, semi-related school sites like slack,
overleaf and azure, and entertainment (Q7).
Fig. 3. The results of question 4.
Fig. 4. The results of question 5.
The last question (Q8) wished to assess the security mea-
sures NTNU students actively use, see figure 5. The most
common three, used by around 80%, was closing the computer
screen when walking away from it, checking links before
clicking them, and checking the sender of emails. 63.5% also
made sure to lock their computer before walking away from
it, and 66.7% makes sure to update their OS when needed.
A smaller percentage of 47.6% used firewalls, 44.4% used
password managers, and 36.5% used password generators for
secure passwords. This suggests that some students, although
a minority, does not actively consider cyber security measures.
Fig. 5. The results of question 8.
V. DISCUSSION
Many students did not use unique passwords for their
NTNU accounts, which could leave these accounts vulnerable
if other sites with the same password were to be breached.
However, 76.2% of students have never used their NTNU
email to sign up for other websites. This suggests that even if
an attacker obtained a password used for an NTNU account,
they likely would not gain access, as the NTNU email address
would still be unknown and the password would not be linked
to the account.
Since 2021, two-factor authentication has been mandatory
for NTNU accounts [9]. This security measure adds an extra
layer of protection, making it even more difficult for unau-
thorised users to access an NTNU account, even if they have
the password. The data collected in this study supports the
usefulness of two-factor authentication.
Among other password security-related mechanisms, pass-
word managers and automatic password generators were the
least utilised security measures by the students questioned.
A prevalent security measure among students was clos-
ing their laptops when leaving them unattended. However,
on macOS, which was a common operating system among
respondents, the computer does not lock until a few minutes
have passed. This could potentially give an adversary time to
access the computer.
The results of the questionnaire revealed that a small per-
centage of students download or stream illegal content while
connected to the NTNU network or VPN. Specifically, 3.2%
of the respondents admitted to be downloading illegal content,
while 11.1% reported streaming illegal content. Although these
percentages are relatively low, it is crucial to acknowledge the
potential risks associated with such activities. Downloading
and streaming illegal content not only expose the individual
students to legal consequences and malware risks, but they also
jeopardise the security and reputation of the NTNU network.
In general, these results shows the usage of multiple security
related measures. However, there is still room for improvement
as only two of the security measures listed are used by more
than 80% of the respondents. This moderately complies with
the research done in ”student information security practices
and awareness” [6] and ”The Level of Information Security
Awareness of First-Year University Students” [8]. These stud-
ies both indicates that usage of security measures in practice
is low, but the research in this study shows that some security
measures are used by the majority, but that there is opportunity
for improvement.
VI. CONCLUSION
This research has shed light on the online habits and secu-
rity practices of NTNU students while using the university’s
network or VPN. Majority of the students use multiple security
related measures, however there are students reusing pass-
words, carelessly clicking on links, and not actively updating
software. The results might therefor indicate that there is room
for improvement.
There are some limitations to this type of survey, as
multiple-choice questions often provide a fixed set of response
options, which may not accurately represent all participants’
situations, opinions, or experiences. This can lead to incom-
plete or inaccurate data collection. Furthermore, respondents
may misinterpret the question or answer choices, causing
them to choose an option that does not truly reflect their
thoughts or experiences. Also, capturing the complexity of
human behavior and habits through multiple-choice questions
is challenging, as they may not address the underlying factors
or motivations affecting this.
Another limitation was how the calculated sample size was
381 subjects, which was not an achievable number. The final
questionnaire resulted in 63 answers. This data limitation
resulted in a final result that can not be viewed as fully rep-
resentative of all the NTNU students in Trondheim. Another
limitation, making the results less representative, was how the
sample group was picked. Random sampling would be ideal,
but the data was collected from both convenience and random
sampling. A large majority of the results are therefor from
students of the IE-faculty, who might be more technologically
advanced than students from non IT or tech related studies.
For future research it would be interesting to run a similar
study comparing students cyber security knowledge with their
actively used security related measures, as this research only
assess the security measures used by students´, and not
their awareness. This would be a similar study to ”Students
Information Security Practices and Awareness” [6], however
as mentioned this research is potentially outdated, and could
use a reassessment. It could also be interesting to compare
students habits when using NTNU systems with habits on their
private accounts and network, to see if the issue of poor digital
security lies within compliance or awareness.
Lastly, thank you Nora Othilie Ringdal for guidance and
feedback throughout this research.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Eason, B. Noble, and I. N. Sneddon, “On certain integrals of
Lipschitz-Hankel type involving products of Bessel functions”, Phil.
Trans. Roy. Soc. London, vol. A247, pp. 529–551, April 1955.
[2] Oates, Briony J, “Researching information systems and computing,”
Sage, pages 98–113, 2005
[3] UiO, ”Nettskjema”, https://nettskjema.no/
[4] NTNU, ”Student i Trondhieim”, https://www.ntnu.no/studentliv/trondheim
[5] Y. Chen and W. He, ”Security risks and protection in online learning:
A survey”, IRRODL, Vol 14, pages 108–127, 2013
[6] Ludwig Slusky and Parviz Partow-Navid, ”Students Information Se-
curity Practices and Awareness”, Journal of Information Privacy and
Security, Vol 8, pages 3–26, 2012
[7] Arfive Ghandi, ”Quantitative Assessment of Information Security
Awareness on Informatics Students in a University”, ICIT 2017: Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 International Conference on Information Technol-
ogy, 2017, Pages 346–350, https://doi.org/10.1145/3176653.3176728
[8] Torley G 
¨ 
abor, The Level of Information Security Awareness of First- 
´
Year University Students. In: The 11th International Conference on
Applied Informatics, 2020, Eger.
[9] https://www.digi.no/artikler/intervju-na-skal-ntnu-innfore-tofaktor-for-
mer-enn-42-000-studenter-har-mye-med-angrepene-pa-stortinget-a-
gjore/510530
[10] Beth H. Jones and Lynn R. Heinrichs, ”Do Business Students Practice
Smartphone Security?”, Journal of Computer Information Systems, Volume 53, 2012
